The safety razors market is in the midst of disruption these days.
Traditional players such as Gillette and Schick continue to focus on driving up the functional
value created by their product, offering more blades, offering vibrating razor heads -- and
patenting these technical innovations to try to sustain their competitive advantage.
However, the market has recently seen a few new entrants who are looking to create value
in different ways.
One of these new entrants is Billie, a shaving products company founded by a woman creating
products for women.
After years of using men's razors to avoid the "pink tax"—the extra amount women pay
for gender-specific products— Billie founder Georgina Gooley decided to take matters into
her own hands.
In 2017 she and a partner launched Billie, offering an affordable subscription service
for female-first premium razors and other body care products.
Gooley states “We’re combating the ’pink tax’ because the idea that women should
pay more for something purely because of their gender is absurd.”
On top of this, their products are uniquely engineered for the way women shave, are priced
fairly, and they use healthy ingredients— they’re vegan and contain no toxins or GMOs.
The Billie website explains that unlike other razor companies that build razors for men
and also sell them to women, at Billie, women are not an afterthought – they’re the
first thought.
Billie states that it has one mission: to provide you with quality shaving supplies
and premium body care products.
Now that you know more about the company, let’s take a stab at imagining Billie’s
positioning statement:
First, what’s the target segment?
Well clearly, they’re targeting women.
But beyond that, what do we know?
We know they’re going after women who want high-quality female-first products, and women
who are comfortable shopping online.
Second, what are the key benefits Billie is offering?
A product that is designed for women first?
A reasonable price?
A subscription service?
Billie would need to decide which benefit is most important to their target market and
be sure to emphasize that in their marketing.
Third, what competitors are the appropriate frame of reference?
What products or services does Billie want to be compared to?
Well, Billie’s greatest point of differentiation from other razor companies is that it’s
designed for women, so it has the most to gain from encouraging customers to compare
its products to all disposable razors, particularly those designed for men.
That’s the comparison set that would make Billie’s benefits stand out.
And finally, what evidence can Billie provide that supports its key benefit?
That fills in the last blank.
So while we don’t know what Billie’s internal positioning statement is, we can imagine that
it might look something like the following:
For (women who are socially aware and who prefer the convenience of shopping online),
(Billie) is the only brand among all (shaving products) that (provides a shaving experience
specifically designed for women) because (Billie’s products - include female-friendly design
such as rounded edges for curves, are priced fairly, and are free of harmful additives
and toxins).
To review: Your Positioning Statement should be:
First of all, written for an internal audience -- this is not a statement that we’re going
to show to customers, it’s for your engineers, your RND department, your manufacturing team,
your marketers, and your ad agency, among others.
Second, it should be written in plain & clear language -- each team I just listed needs
to take away the same meaning when they read the positioning statement.
Sexy taglines are great, but they can be interpreted in many different ways.
Those will be created by your ad agency based on your positioning statement.
The positioning statement itself needs to be clear.
Third, It should focus on benefits not features - customers buy benefits and the way you deliver
those benefits through different features may evolve over time.
Finally, It should highlight 2 or 3 differentiating benefits - any more than that, and you risk
confusing your customer and dampening word of mouth.
Once a positioning statement is written, It should be the foundation from which all marketing
decisions are made!