A useful way of thinking about a product is to consider the different types of value it
delivers.
The concept we often use is called the “augmented product”, which says that there are three
types of value associated with every product.
At the most basic level, it delivers functional value.
Essentially what does that product or service do for me?
At the next level, we can think about experiential value: while it’s delivering functional
value, how does it feel?
How does it taste or smell or sound?
Then finally, symbolic value.
We can ask how does that product make me look while using or buying it?
Not just how does the product look, but how does it make the customer look?
For example, consider the product Snapple.
At a functional level, it provides hydration.
That at the end of the day is what the product is meant to do.
On an experiential level, many people think Snapple tastes good.
Then finally, at a symbolic level, how do I look drinking Snapple as compared with another
source of hydration?
I want to emphasize that even though I've drawn these as concentric ovals, it's not
necessarily the case that consumers will make decisions or weight things in this order.
In other words, it's not necessarily the case that consumers will first figure out what
products provide the most functional value and then only choose a subset of those and
move on to figure out which are best in the experiential level.
In fact, that's not in any way the case.
We know this intuitively.
Fashion products, for example, often provide minimal functional or experiential value,
but the symbolic component is weighted most heavily.
I also want to note that even though we may think of the high weighting of experiential
and symbolic value as a consumer phenomenon because they may appear to be almost irrational,
this would be a mistake.
In fact, we still see symbolic value being weighed quite heavily even in business to
business purchases.
For example, in a buying organization there's often significant concern for status and prestige.
So buyers consider to what extent making one decision versus another, one vendor versus
another for example, might affect how they appear.
Even in B2B, we need to be aware that the value delivered by a product may go well beyond
the functional!
There are many challenges in product design, and in particular, the most salient challenge,
at least at the early stage of design is, how do I know what people want?
I have lots of different ways that I could innovate, lots of different features and benefits
I could deliver through the product.
Which ones should I choose?
I think it’s fair to say that there's an emerging idea or belief that customers really
don't know what they want.
I don't want to criticize Steve Jobs, but I do take issue with a statement that he famously
made; that it isn't the customer's job to know what they want.
I'm going to disagree with that, or at least disagree with some of the implications that
people have drawn from that statement.
I would draw a distinction between problems and solutions.
I believe that customers know what problems they have.
So in a product design sense, customers know precisely what benefits they're looking for.
They know what problems they have in their lives, and they know that they want a solution
to that problem.
What they don't know is what features we ought to build into our products in order to provide
those benefits.
In other words, they don't really know how our products can solve or might be able to
solve the problems they have, but they know what their problems are.
So I would argue it is the customer's job to know what they want, but it's our job as
marketers, our job as product designers, to figure out and communicate how our products
can solve those problems.
This distinction has implications for the entire range of product design.
For example, in interpreting research, when a customer tells you that they want a specific
product feature, they’re not really telling you that they want the product feature, they’re
telling you they have a problem that they think can be solved by this feature.
With that in mind then, how do we figure out what people care about.
How do we figure out what problems they're trying to solve?
Of course, we need to engage in market research.
There are many possible market research methodologies you could pursue.
There's really a continuum from purely qualitative research, one on one interviews, for example,
or in a group setting, a focus group where we sit down and have an unstructured discussion
all the way to quantitative research like surveys, where we have large, preferably random
sample of subjects that allow us to assess statistical significance.
And I'm not going to tell you that one is systematically better than the other.
In fact, they serve very, very different purposes.
A focus group or an interview is a great way to learn something new...to hear something
from a customer that you’ve never thought about before.
Then, you might take that idea and run a survey or another quantitative technique in order
to figure out whether it makes sense -- whether it achieves statistical significance -- in
a larger sample.
So a general prescription that you want to think about is to use qualitative methods
at the outset of the product design process, and then move towards a more quantitative
approach.