Today, we’ll discuss the benefits and drawbacks of having a broad product line.
The core question is, how many products do you want to offer; how do you manage your
product line?
As you might imagine this is a balancing act between factors that favor longer line vs
shorter lines.
Let’s begin with the positive aspects of a broad product line.
First, product diversity.
With a variety of different products, we are able to meet more customer needs.
Creating more value which should translate into higher profits.
Another argument for having many products is the possibility of benefiting from scale
economies.
For example, if I am producing cars that are based on the same fundamental chassis design,
by offering multiple models based on that same chassis I’m able to learn quicker and
lower production costs.
For example, many Lexus and Toyota models share the same underlying chassis.
Another positive benefit of a broad product line is credibility in comparative selling.
For example, imagine you are selling appliances and all you sell are GE refrigerators.
A customer comes in asking for recommendations, and you respond with “you should buy this
GE refrigerator, they’re the best.
They’re better than Whirlpool for what you’re looking for.”
But the customer might reasonably question whether this is an unbiased, objective opinion.
On the other hand if you sell both GE and Whirlpool, and you tell the customer GE is
the best choice, that statement comes with more credibility.
So generally, broader product lines might come with more credibility in comparative
selling.
Another argument that has been made is that the broader the product line, the more successful
I will be at competitive preemption.
In other words, stopping other brands from entering the market.
There was a study done in the sugared cereal market where researchers explained the reason
why there are so many cereal products that are only slightly different from each other
is that there is only finite shelf space, and the more products established brands offer,
the less open space there is on the shelf and therefore the harder it is for new brands
and products to come in.
Finally, in some cases broader product lines can work as a hedge against economic fluctuations.
For example, it might be the case that some products do better in up markets, and some
products do better in down markets.
By offering both products, you might reduce the variation in your sales revenue.
So those are arguments why I would want a broad product line, now let’s talk about
why fewer products might be better.
To begin, broad lines might cause customer confusion.
Customers often complain that all of the companies products seem the same, and they can’t figure
out which to buy.
With a more narrow line you can often avoid this customer confusion or frustration, and
possibly deliver higher satisfaction in the process.
Additionally, a common argument against introducing new products is cannibalization; meaning the
company experiences a drop in sales of one of it’s products due to the introduction
of another product by the same company.
I want to caution that this is an argument we hear a lot, but is often misguided.
If you’re going to make the cannibalization argument, it’s critical to make sure your
counter factual is correct.
Here’s an example to make this clear.
Apple is always introducing new phone products.
Some argue they make a mistake by keeping the older generation phones around when they
introduce a new one.
So when they introduced the iPhone 5, why didn’t they get rid of the iPhone 4?
Doesn’t that cannibalize the iPhone 5?
Don’t some people who might have bought the iPhone 5 just keep buying the iPhone 4?
As it turns out, no.
As it turns out that’s not the right counterfactual.
iPhone users typically upgrade to the next iPhone.
Most of the iPhone 5 buyers come from the iPhone 4, so it is not that the iPhone 4 is
cannibalizing the iPhone 5.
In fact, the iPhone 4 draws a consumer base from different platforms.
If you look on this lower bar chart here, you can see that the previous platform for
the iPhone 5, is iPhone.
But the previous platform for the iPhone 4S is android, smartphones, and feature phones.
So again, the correct counterfactual here is not cannibalization of iPhone 5 sales,
but it is drawing customers from completely different platforms.
Another argument for limiting the number of products is based on competitive balance.
Some companies are hesitant to introduce a new product that might encroach on a competitor’s
turf.
They want to keep harmony between companies to prevent too much price or marketing competition.
Finally, another drawback faced by companies with broad product lines is the issue of resource
allocation.
The company now has to figure out how to allocate the marketing budget across all of their products.
If there is one product, it’s an easy problem, but with more products it becomes more difficult
to determine which products receive which portion of the budget.
The most common approach to allocating marketing resources is an “eat what you kill” approach.
For example, advertising to sales ratios are commonly used to allocate advertising funds;
in other words, products with the highest sales get the highest advertising dollars,
the most resources.
But this isn’t the right way to do it.
What we want is to invest any resource, marketing resources for example, according to expected
marginal returns.
Meaning, we want to invest the next dollar where it will yield the highest return.
In practice, however, this is not what happens.
Why not?
Well, because it’s easier to either allocate resources based on average returns, allocate
resources on sales, allocate resources based on past history, than it is to go out and
estimate marginal responses.
The main message here is that long product lines may confer on the firm great benefits,
but it’s equally important to consider the costs associated with them, including the
added complexity they introduce to the organization.