So let’s tie this back to the framework we introduced at the beginning of the course.
How can we use that to make sense of everything that happened at JCPenney?
Ron Johnson came in with two success stories under his belt – Target and Apple stores
– and very quickly applied them to Penney.
You might say he went right in, he started with the 4Ps – the tactics.
But the framework, which is iterative – puts analysis first.
So what might we have discovered if we’d looked at a few of the five C’s first?
And let’s focus on three of them: company, context and customer.
First, the company.
The “C” for company tells us to consider those things that, the company, that we are
good at.
What were Penney’s core competencies at the time Johnson came in?
They had a relatively good brand with their particular target segment, but that’s less
of a competency than an asset.
They had several clothing brands that resonated with their target segment that were exclusive
to Penney, but it’s not clear that this was a competency that was going to lead to
a sustainable competitive advantage.
In fact, when Ron Johnson came on board, it clearly had not lead to an advantage.
So Penney was a firm that had few unique core competencies but perhaps more, a set of assets
-- brands and retail locations -- and those were failing to create value for Penney.
Second, we might have looked at the context in which Penney operates.
Penney is a North American store, operating in the US, a country experiencing significant
demographic changes; changes that are really important for a firm that relies on consumer
spending.
Penney had traditionally targeted baby boomers – those Americans born between 1946 and
1962.
However, as this population ages, they’re entering a stage of life that means they’ll
spend more on healthcare and less on apparel.
Meanwhile, the growing demographic of Millennials – or those born between the early 1980s
and the mid-1990s– are entering a phase of expanded spending.
Now, there are three key facts about Millennials as it applies to Penney.
First of all millennials spend less on apparel than have previous generational cohorts.
Secondly, they don’t shop in malls, where most JC Penney stores are found.
And third, millennials do not look favorably on the brand JC Penney.
Based on this and other demographic shifts occurring in the US, firms reliant on consumer
spending have no choice but to revisit their target segments and the wants and needs of
those segments.
Penney had aged well with Boomer Moms who clipped coupons and became GrandMoms.
But this younger generation of consumers had different shopping habits, and didn’t connect
in a positive way with the Penney brand.
Penney needed to rethink their segmentation strategy and adjust their positioning accordingly.
Isn’t that what Ron Johnson was doing by making Penney hip and cool?
Yes, you could imagine that that was his intent – to attract a younger shopper by making
Penney look hip and cool.
But there are a few issues with how he went about this.
First, millennials are not this huge monolithic group; they’re a demographic cohort.
And from a marketing standpoint, there are many nuances, in terms of income, psychographics,
lifestyle, self-perception that drive their wants, needs and purchase decisions.
That mean this demographic group is actually made up of many different segments.
Penny had to discover which segments were right for Penney – and vice versa.
Which segment’s wants and needs could Penny address better than their competitors?
Second, Penney was not starting with a blank slate.
Penney had a brand that stood for something, even if that “something” was steep discounts
and bad memories of back-to-school shopping.
Johnson wanted to turn Penney into “JCP” - a new, innovative, upscale brand; a store
where young people with money came to hang out.
Executing such a radical shift of meaning of your brand is challenging.
First, it takes time and evidence to convince your target segment that you really are who
you say you are.
And what credibility did Penney have to lay claim to being hip and cool?
Further, changing your brand meaning can be off-putting to customers who thought your
brand was just fine in the first place.
So while Penney needed to change to attract new consumers, they also, for financial stability,
needed to do that without completely alienating their current core customer.