After Johnson’s departure, the new CEO Ellison worked to bring Penney’s target segment
more sharply into focus.
Penney’s target segment is a millennial mom from a blue-collar background, looking
for one-stop shopping, who is aware of upscale design, but who’s operating on a limited
budget.
As Ellison said on an earnings call one “We can convince ourselves that our core customers
are a more affluent demographic, but really, they’re not.”
How is Penney positioning itself for this target market?
Not only is Penney targeting these millennial mom’s, it’s thought about their wants
and needs – both as a woman and as a mother.
So let’s take a look at the marketing mix - the 4Ps.
Pricing.
What do you think Penney did with its pricing strategy?
If you’re saying “they probably raised prices and went back to deep discounts”
you’d be exactly right.
Penney realized that its customer wanted to be smart and get a good deal.
So Penney went back to higher list prices but far more frequent and deep sales.
It even instituted a “Penney Day” selling some items for one cent.
Penney also moved away from some high-priced brands that Johnson had brought in, such as
Michael Graves and Jonathan Adler.
These brands were alluring to Penney’s new target customers, but the prices were far
beyond what they were willing to pay, especially at Penney.
That brings us to Product.
Penney probably made more changes – or reversed more of Johnson’s decisions around Product
than any of the other Ps.
In an effort to change their brand and appeal to a more hip segment, Penney had brought
in a lot of high-end brands, eliminating many of Penney’s own “house” brands.
For example, St. John’s Bay, a popular Penney brand, had contributed over one billion US
dollars in sales each year, but under Johnson, it was eliminated.
The returning CEO Ullman brought it back.
Likewise, former superstar brands like Liz Claiborne, Arizona Jeans, and Worthington
received premium spots in the stores again.
Another new brand has been introduced to attract younger shoppers: Belle + Sky.
This brand has the added operational twist of being built on a “fast fashion” platform.
Another move, aligned with their new target segment, is a collaboration with reality TV
star Ashley Nell Tipton, Project Runway's first-ever plus-size winner.
With Tipton, Penney is creating Boutique+, a plus-size clothing line.
Sixty-five percent of American women are considered plus-size, and clothing in this segment is
an estimated $20 billion market in the U.S..
Further, plus-size clothing is growing faster than women's clothing in general.
With women's clothing being Penney's single biggest sales category, having an on-trend
collection here could be a big plus.
Now Penney did keep the “store within a store” concept, first implemented with Sephora
and then extended to other brands such as Levi’s and now Hallmark.
These boutiques bring shoppers into a JC Penney store and the intent is that the shopper will
find plenty of other things to like, at a price they can’t resist.
All of these changes in beauty and clothing should freshen up or liven-up the Penney brand,
skewing it a little bit younger and a little bit more upscale.
And this is a more realistic shift for Penney than what Johnson tried to accomplish.
It’s an update that targets a segment that has plenty in common with Penney’s aging
core customer, but may possibly provide a future for Penney.
And these changes have the important benefit of not alienating the older consumer who is
Penney’s bread and butter.
Penney made two other changes in the product segment I want to talk about by asking the
question “What else does our Millennial Mom need?
What does she want?
And how can we more completely serve her?”
Such an analysis yielded two key opportunities: salons and appliances.
Penney had over 800 salons in its stores, making it one of the largest salon chains
in the nation.
Furthermore, haircuts are remarkably resistant to competition from online vendors – “As
Ullman says, ‘You can’t get a haircut online.’”
Salon visitors come in eight times a year—twice as often as the average department-store customer—and
they spend twice as much.
Finally, Penney went back into the appliance business.
Customer analysis revealed that 1/3 of Penney’s customers were buying appliances at the mall
– typically at Sears, but definitely not at Penney.
Further a “failed search” analysis of their web page told them that appliances was
the #1 thing people came to their webpage, but could not.
Penney piloted appliances at 22 stores initially, and after big success, rolled them out to
500 more stores.
And one other change for the millennial mom? Penney brought back toys to the kids’ departments.
What changes did Penney make around the “P” for Place?
Probably the biggest change was operational, but essential for their customer: it re-aligned
its online offerings with what was found in the store.
It updated and relaunched its app.
And it brought back the infamous Penney catalog.
All of this means that Penney adopted a true omnichannel strategy, allowing customers to
buy Penney’s products wherever and whenever they want.
And by 2015 Penney’s offered same day “Buy Online Pick Up in Store” service, a real
change from what it had seen under Johnson.
And what about the fourth P, promotion?
From the moment of its post-Johnson attempted turnaround, Penney has shown that it’s firmly
in the present by using Twitter and other social media platforms to listen to its customers
and gather their feedback.
A social media listening tour asked for customers’ input on favorite brands and reactions to
its decisions.
Penney’s also shown it’s not above poking fun at itself.
When Beyonce posted a pregnancy photo showing her in an idyllic setting full of flowers
with a pastoral background, haters took to social media to deride it as a “JC Penney
photo shoot.”
Penney good naturedly jumped into the fray, using Beyonce’s own lyrics, stating it was
“time to get in formation” and stating that Penney “loved the hive.”
And the logo? Penney is back to the traditional JC Penney logo.
Sometimes “old” can also mean “known” and “trusted.”
So what do we learn from this case?
That marketing is dynamic.
What worked for Penney during its heyday didn’t work for it in the 2010s, and it likely wouldn’t
work for it in the 2020s.
But more importantly, what worked for Ron Johnson at Target and at Apple didn’t work
for JCPenney, either.
How do firms cope with this dynamism?
Remember your 5Cs analysis.
You must revisit the 5Cs regularly.
As your context changes, you have to change.
As your competition changes, you have to change and know that they’ll change in return.
As customers change, you have to adapt, maybe by changing the segment you decide to target
or by shifting how you’ll position yourself for your segment.
In fact, you should never not have your finger on the pulse of how the world around your
organization, your organization itself, and your competition is evolving and changing.
Penney reported in 2016 that millennial moms made up 45% of its revenue...which is encouraging,
because this segment is only going to grow in the future.
The big challenge is that, in the end, Penney is still a department store.
The department store has been under attack from a variety of retail formats, from stand-alone
stores like Kohl’s and Home Depot, to online platforms such as Amazon and WalMart.
And there’s no indication that this will let up anytime soon.
Consumers, especially younger ones, are showing less and less interest in shopping at the
mall.
Penney’s best hope is to follow a key tenet of marketing, something they apparently forgot
for a brief period of time.
As Ellison said in a conference call a few years back, "We're trying something different.
We're actually listening to the customer.”