Now that we know what positioning is, let’s dig a bit deeper into actually creating a
positioning statement for a product or service.
You might be familiar with the concept of a value proposition or a unique selling proposition,
a USP.
A positioning statement is a similar concept.
Before you can write your positioning statement, you’re going to need a few key pieces of
information, based on decisions you’ve made after your 5Cs analysis and during your segmentation
and targeting work.
The first key input is the segment you’ve decided to target.
You want to have a definition of your target segment that is descriptive and actionable.
If you have multiple target segments, you’ll need a positioning statement for each of them.
That’s because you’ve presumably put customers into different segments because they are seeking
different benefits so in turn they’ll each need their own statement, you’ll see in
a moment.
Second, you need to know what key benefits your target market is seeking.
Recall in the targeting discussion, you chose this segment because you have some sort of
competitive advantage at delivering the benefits that matter most to these customers.
You can list one or two, maybe three benefits at the most.
You want to stay focused to avoid confusion among customers and also to encourage word
of mouth.
And in addition, it’s likely hard to credibly state that your best in three different areas.
Also - one other quick note -- these these are benefits and not features.
Customers buy benefits.
The third thing you’ll need is the frame of reference you want to the customer to take
when considering your offering -- what product category should your customer consider you
to be in?
Should they compare your offering to other luxury cars?
Should they consider you a sports cars?
Should they consider you a sedan?
What’s the competitive set you want to put yourself into, in your customer’s mind?
Finally, what evidence do you have that you can deliver the benefits you cite?
Why should your potential customers believe you when you make these claims?
Including this information in the positioning statement keeps your organization honest – do
we have an actual objective reason as to WHY the customer should believe that we can deliver
on the key benefits better than our competitor?
The general format of the positioning statement is as follows:
For (our target market), (our brand) is the only brand among all (products in category)
that (unique value claim, that offer that unique value claim) because (reasons to believe,
here’s where you list the reasons to believe).
So you can see when you combine these elements, you get a simple statement, maybe long but
simple, that specifically states how you’ll satisfy the wants and needs of a particular
target segment better than any other offering in that category.
Let’s look at an example using Volvo.
First, we have to make sure we understand the product offering.
Through the early 2000s, Volvo easily held the position of being the safest automobile
available.
Volvo innovated faster than any other car company on safety features such as roll-over
resisting stability systems and blind-spot warning systems.
It routinely came out on top of safety ratings, and it was on this key customer benefit that
is positioned itself.
So, if we look at a possible positioning statement for Volvo’s North American division in the
early 2000s, it might look like the this:
For upscale American families, that would be the target statement, Volvo, the brand,
is the only brand among all, and here they chose to categorize themselves as a family
automobile, that offers, the benefit that they highlighted was maximum safety because,
why?
What was the evidence?
Because it not only offers best-in-class crash safety ratings, but it’s also an industry
leader in consistently implementing new life saving technology on major models, including
anti-rollover stability systems and blind spot collision warning systems.
Volvo absolutely owned the position of “safest automobile company” until two things happened:
other car companies caught up with it, and it moved away, it itself moved away from this
positioning in the mid 2000s.