Today we’ll talk about how to position your product or service.
This is the final piece of the marketing strategy -- after you’ve segmented the market and
you've chosen your target or targets -- and getting this right is a necessary (even if
not sufficient) condition for marketing success.
Why is this so important?
Well, one of the unique aspects of marketing is the tremendous degrees of freedom we have
as marketers.
We need to choose prices and product features, which online publishers to show our display
ads and which retail outlets to sell out products through.
There are simply so many decisions to make and so many alternatives within each of those
decisions!
This is what makes marketing so exciting, but it’s also what makes it a field that
is so difficult to master.
There’s no silver bullet, no magic formula that I can offer you.
However, what I can say is that the formulation of a strategy to guide all of these choices
is probably the closest you can get.
Having a clear strategy will help you to prioritize your investment of time and money to those
tactics that are most worthy of your focus.
For a quick review, what is positioning?
First off, positioning is an internal statement.
This is going to reside on PowerPoints inside your organization.
The customer will never explicitly see the positioning statement.
However hopefully, they'll see the manifestation of the positioning in the consistent and purposeful
choices of advertising, products, pricing et cetera..
The positioning statement is typically a superlative claim of some benefit to the customer.
For example claiming, “Our power tools are the most durable” or perhaps that they’re
“the most affordable.”
So, again, the statement should be a benefit, not a feature.
Customers are looking for solutions to problems and this (and only this) should be the mission
of our marketing plan.
They don’t care about technology but about how that technology provides them with value.
Marketers often think about (and communicate about) positioning through what’s called
a perceptual map.
Perceptual maps are based on data collected from consumers, usually through a survey.
They capture the perceived similarity of providers in a market.
In this example, we have coffee shops in the Washington DC area and the axis might represent
affordability and accessibility.
That is, how easy is it to find one of these restaurants?
The perceptual map is useful because, on one hand, it gives us a sense for which competitors
are perceived as being closest to us, in the eyes of customers.
Second, it might identify opportunities either for repositioning an existing brand or launching
a new one.
As I’ve already alluded, the most important aspect of positioning is probably its role
in enforcing consistency and prioritization on our choice of the many tactics required
of the marketing function.
Let me give you an example.
Consider Black & Decker power tools in the 1990’s.
They faced a number of challenges.
On one hand, there was social pressure among tradesmen that led them to look down upon
-- sometimes to to laugh at -- those tradesmen who brought Black & Decker tools to the jobsite.
Part of this stemmed from a perception that Black & Decker tools were of low durability
and durability was of utmost important to the tradesman.
Other issues they faced included a nagging sense that they may be pricing too low and
thereby sending the wrong signal to tradesmen about the quality of their tools.
Finally, some at the firm felt there might also be a distribution issue.
Makita was selling into price clubs much more broadly than Black & Decker was.
Now, imagine how you might go about addressing these challenges in the absence of a strategy.
Well, you might just go down the list.
Changing the color and name to handle the social problem.
Selling in the price clubs.
Raising prices due to prices being too low et cetera.
The problem here is that this gives rise to a completely haphazard almost indecipherable
set of marketing actions.
Just as an example; what kind of brand raises prices at the same time it starts selling
in price clubs?
This makes absolutely no sense.
What are you communicating to customers as you do this?
On the other hand, what they did, one of the reasons why they were so successful is they
first formulated that strategy.
They formulated the positioning of their brand with respect to the customer.
They based this decision on all of these insights and all of their understandings of their own
strengths and weaknesses and those of their competitors.
Their strategy -- their overarching positioning was that they were going to be the no downtime
company.
That was the message they wanted to deliver through all of their marketing actions to
the customer.
Once this strategy was set, you realize well, that raising prices has nothing to do with
the positioning and certainly selling in price clubs could only harm that message.
And so, positioning provides not only consistency among the marketing actions but prioritization.
Some tactics are core to the strategy and should take precedence among all of the marketing
actions.
Others are perhaps “nice to have” but should only be pursued after the former have
been sufficiently supported.
To quote Tolstoy, "There may be few ways to love but many ways to hate."
I’ve amended that a bit to say, “there may be few ways to positioning effectively,
but there are many, many ways to formulate a very poor one.”
Here are a few common things that firms get wrong about positioning.
One common mistake is often called under positioning; giving customers only a vague sense for what
the positioning is and why the product is better on certain dimensions.
On the other hand, painting too narrow of a picture can also be detrimental.
This “over positioning” can sometimes leave a firm with a dedicated but small customer
base.
Another common mistake is called confused positioning.
One of my favorite examples of this is TiVo, one of the early pioneers in DVRs.
I would argue that one of the reasons they weren’t able to capture fully the value
associated with their amazing innovation was a confused positioning.
They came out with a campaign that advertised all the benefits associated with their technology.
When they talked about the ability to pause live TV and the ability to skip commercials
and all of the other benefits, it made it very difficult for consumers to understand
what this thing was really best at.
It also may have hampered word of mouth about the product.
While one group cared about certain benefits, others cared about different benefits.
This made it very difficult for people to engage in meaningful conversation about the,
at the time very exciting, new product.
Finally, one should also try avoid what is called doubtful positioning.
This is when you're making claims that the consumer just can’t believe.
To summarize, the positioning statement is a critical part of the overall marketing strategy
and represents the linchpin between all the research our insights team has developed,
on one hand, and the broad and varied set of actions that the marketing function will
implement, on the other.
While I can’t say that a clear and thoughtful positioning will guarantee marketing success.
I can say with confidence that the absence of this step will almost surely guarantee
the opposite.