Here’s another example from the manufacturing company Black and Decker, now Stanley Black
and Decker.
Black and Decker established the power tools market in 1917, and through the 1980s was
relatively successful in the space.
However, in the late 70s and early 80s, Black and Decker began a move “from the garage
into the house” by introducing the Dustbuster vacuum cleaner and purchasing GE’s Housewares
Division.
This move “into the house” started to shift the meaning of the brandname “Black
and Decker” – away from “rugged power tools” to a brand image more strongly associated
with a home-maker than a construction worker.
Around this same time, Black and Decker found itself struggling to compete in a new market
of independent construction workers known as “tradesmen.”
Black and Decker’s tools were technically good, but its evolving brand image was not
one that was appealing to this particular segment.
No construction worker wanted to go to the jobsite with the same brand that he’d used
that morning to make his toast or his coffee.
Black and Decker addressed this challenge head-on.
First, it changed the brand name for its tradesman line of tools.
Black and Decker already owned the brand name DeWalt, so it used this name to relaunch or
reposition its tradesmen power tool line.
In addition to the new name, Black and Decker introduced a new color and a few necessary
product upgrades, calling the new brand DeWalt.
But even more important than the physical changes made, Black and Decker made sure to
position the new brand for the unique benefits that were critical to attracting the tradesman.
It turns out, when a tradesman’s tool break, he can’t work.
And if he doesn’t work, he doesn’t get paid.
So Black and Decker built the DeWalt product line to focus on that key benefit.
Let’s look at a possible positioning statement Black and Decker might have used.
For the tradesman, DeWalt is the only brand among all power tool brands that can guarantee
a “no down time” experience because DeWalt is the only brand that offers high quality
tools along with a 48-hour guaranteed turn-around on repairs with a loaner tool, and free service
for one year.