I want to talk about “marketing strategy” but first let’s take a quick step back to
make clear everything we’ve done up to this point.
The marketing process begins with careful analysis and insights.
We learn about the customer.
What are her preferences?
Her perceptions?
What process does she go through while making a decision?
We understand our competitors.
What are they good at?
What are they likely to do?
We assess where we stand with other organizations with whom we collaborate.
Partners, for example.
Or distributors.
What are their incentives?
Are they in conflict with ours?
We inventory our own strengths and weaknesses, of course.
And, where relevant, we make sure we appreciate what might be changing in the overall context.
This might reflect economic factors or perhaps political factors.
Based on all these insights, we can then formulate a marketing strategy which we’ll use to
guide all of the actions or tactics we’ll eventually choose.
In a sense, I like to tell marketing students to think about marketing strategy as a fundamentally
transformative step in which we take all the insights, all the information we've gathered,
and transform those insights into actions.
We'll begin by focusing and discussing segmentation.
At the root of segmentation is the very simple idea that people are different and often those
differences reveal patterns or groupings.
We typically focus, in segmentation, on differences in preferences, or tastes.
To segment the market, we need to compare the different tastes of each customer and
get insight as to what they want in their products.
So, to see what I mean, it might help to look at it graphically.
This is called a Taste Space, where the different dimensions reflect different levels of attributes.
On the x-axis, just as an example, we have power.
On the y-axis, we have speed.
And so each X in this space represents a customer and those to the right like high power while
those to the left like low power.
And so what we can see here is that there naturally arise two potential segments.
Segment one, in the north-west quadrant, seems to like high speed and low power.
Segment two, in the south east prefer high power but low speed.
Why is this useful?
Why do we want to go through the process of putting people into buckets like this?
Because it will ultimately help us decide whom to target and focus on.
A common response to this is, “Why target?
I want to sell to everybody?”
You know what?
I agree.
With very few exceptions, I would be happy to sell to anybody.
However, this is really a different point.
While I’ll sell to anybody, I absolutely do not want to market to everybody.
And you can see why this is the case right here.
Marketing to segment one means promising high speed and low power, building products that
deliver on that promise and communicating that your products do this.
What happens if I try to market to both segments?
First off, what will my product look like?
Maybe it will have medium levels of speed and power?
OK but that might not be compelling to any customers, unless I’m a monopoly.
Second, I really open myself up to competition.
In particular, competitors who recognize the importance of targeting could make far more
compelling arguments to both segments.
Just to reiterate, by engaging in segmentation and targeting, number one, I might deliver
more value to customers.
I can engage in more compelling communication because I can talk about those dimensions
or those attributes that those customers, in that segment, care most about.
In a dynamic sense, I might prevent future competitive intrusion because I'm meeting
the needs of my chosen segment.
As a result of all of these things, I'm more likely to be able to retain customers with
higher probability over time.
So that’s the reasoning behind segmentation and targeting.
How do we actually do it?
This is a bit complicated because we often hear about firms creating segments using many
different approaches.
The most common is probably demographics.
We can segment the market by affluence, by gender, by religion, etc.
We might also segment the market geographically.
A great example of this is the bodega in New York City.
As you walk through New York, you'll find a Bodega on just about every corner.
That Bodega caters to the people who live within about a 1-block radius of their store.
Their communication, their product selection, all are focused on that specific geographic
segment.
You might also have heard about firms segmenting the market along behavioral lines.
That is, they might look at past actions that the customer has taken and segment them that
way.
First time buyers, loyal customers, repeat customers, heavy users versus light users.
These are all examples of behavioral segmentation.
So, again, which is best?
How should you do it?
My main message here really is to go back to the taste space.
That is, we want to, where at all possible, focus on underlying preferences.
All of these other approaches — demographics, geography, behavior — are simply observable
proxies for underlying differences in tastes.
To make this more concrete, here’s an example of clear benefit segmentation.
This is the iced coffee product.
And we see segmentation along preferences — for taste vs for high caffeine.
However, how do you actually implement this?
Once I’ve decide that I’m targeting, say, those that prefer high caffeine, how do I
find them?
Well, then, I need to find some proxies and maybe those are, again, geographic or demographic,
for example.
After segmenting the market, we move on to targeting.
What do I mean by ‘targeting a segment?’
Targeting a segment means tailoring the marketing actions, tailoring the four P's, (product,
place, promotion, price), to that specific segment.
I formulate products for those segments that I'm targeting.
I might price uniquely and specifically for different segments.
My promotion, the media I choose, the message I choose, will all depend on the segments
I'm targeting.
Of course, I might distribute through different channels depending on the segments I'm targeting.
If we think about the market as a pie and segmentation as the process of cutting it
up, the next question becomes: Which slice do I want?
That is, which segment do I want to target?
Of course, we're all going to first consider the size of that segment, how fast its growing,
and at least as important, our competitive advantage.
It might be the biggest segment available, it might be the fastest growing, but if customers
are seeking a benefit that requires expertise I don't have, it might not be the most attractive
approach.
I would also suggest that you want to be very careful about over-segmentation.
Always be asking yourself to what extent are the various segments truly distinct?
Perhaps I can aggregate multiple segments into one, and we see this all the time.
At the same time, you might want to target multiple distinct segments at the end of the
day.
Perhaps I want to market to both the high-power segment and the high-speed segment with different
marketing strategies?
In considering any multi-segment approach, we want to think about how different they
are, and to what extent the same set of skills is associated with success in each of those
segments.
To the extent that the underlying messages would need to be very different, you might
want to the addressability of each segment.
Can I reach each segment individually and communicate the differential benefits of my
product to each?
In summary, markets are almost always far too complex, characterized by far too much
heterogeneity, to make a one-size-fits-all approach optimal.
We almost never want to try to be all things to all people.
Instead, we want to first decide how to slice the pie.
Along which dimensions of preference can I create meaningful groupings of distinct customers?
Once we do this, we choose one, or some, of those segments to target.