We’re going to cover some of the important basics of consumer buying behavior.
Our goal here will be to understand the various questions we need to deal with in this stage
of the marketing process.
Of course, we always need to understand what customers want or their preferences.
However, to truly have the depth of knowledge necessary to craft a successful marketing
strategy, we also need to understand their decision-making process.
What does that process look like, and what can we as marketers do to influence that process?
At a high level, we can think of the process in the following way, as occurring essentially
in 4 stages.
Some people also refer to this as the customer journey.
First, consumers recognize the need that they might have.
Perhaps their car breaks down for the fifth time in two months, and this recognition of
the need starts the process or journey.
Next, I'll gather information about the alternative solutions to that problem: "Should I get my
car fixed?
Should I get a new car?
Should I rent a car?"
et cetera.
Next, I might narrow down that possible list of solutions to a manageable number and then
evaluate each of those possible solutions according to some decision rule.
Then, finally, I make a decision.
I choose the solution to my underlying problem and I act on it.
This is a rational, perhaps a hyper-rational, view of a very careful decision maker.
I want you to think about a recent purchase you made, and ask yourself, "Did you really
follow all of the steps in this process?"
Of course, in reality, you probably wouldn't have enough time in the day for this to be
the case.
You can't go through each of these 4 steps for every one of your decisions.
So, let’s think of this one, this decision-making process that I followed when my car broke
down, as a utilitarian process.
In other words, this is a process that follows a careful, exhaustive series of steps and
has a pretty good chance for arriving at the objectively correct answer.
Now think about a purchase that you might have engaged in that didn't follow this utilitarian
process, like the last pack of gum you bought.
You might have followed a process that looks something like this.
You recognized a need and then you skipped any explicit information search or evaluation;
you just bought it.
Most likely you bought something that you had purchased in the past, and basically you
just defaulted to the same solution.
We'll think about this one as a low-involvement purchase process.
You buy it without any explicit evaluation and typically fall back on a brand, or a category,
or a type of solution that you're familiar with.
Another very common process is one in which there's no explicit need or problem, but you
just see something that you like and you buy it.
You're not comparing this item against any others.
Again, there's no explicit need or problem to solve; it just feels right.
We often refer to this as a "hedonic" process.
You can probably think of a time that you made a decision like this.
Maybe you saw a pair of shoes in a store window, or something on a dessert tray, or what have
you.
Again, no explicit need, but you just want to buy it.
We've seen that people are likely to go through any number of different processes.
In fact, the process might vary across category, obviously; but, we also need to realize that
it also varies across people within a given category.
Some people don’t buy new running shoes until their current pair wears out.
Others buy a new pair when they see them in the window of a store while walking through
the mall.
So, the main point we’re making here is that we need to understand what process our
customer is going through.
Why is this so important?
Well, because the role can we play as marketers is very different at various stages in this
process.
Let’s go through the process again so you can see what I mean.
At its core, a need is just the difference between what we want, the ideal state and
where we think we are that that time, the actual or the perceived state.
We might increase the ideal state by increasing a sense of aspiration, or we might attempt
to decrease the perceived current state.
Just as an example here, in this ad they’re trying to convince you that things are worse
than you think, that the risk of identity theft is much higher than you may have assumed.
The next step in the decision-making process tends to be information search.
And the amount of search consumers engage in will influence how much information we
make available to them and perhaps where we put it.
So, it might be useful to understand what drives the amount of research one puts in
before buying a product.
Some of these are intuitive.
For example, you often see that the amount of research, all else equal, is higher for
more important and riskier purchases.
The search is also higher for women, and it increases as age increases.
Search also tends to increase in education, income and intelligence.
I note these differences mainly just to make the point that search is something that will
vary and that marketers need to be sure they appreciate what intensity and type of search
their specific target customer is likely to engage in.
One approach and one end of the extreme, of course, is to make all information costlessly
available and to make search easy for the consumer.
Another is to make search a bit more difficult.
This is an example of an ad where the firm is basically telling consumers that to get
more information they're going to have to call or perhaps visit the dealership.
Why would we want to make search more costly?
In some cases, we don't want everybody coming in.
While in the ideal world, I would only have perfectly qualified customers coming in to
my dealership, making use of my expensive salespeople, that isn’t always possible.
Here, by making search a bit more costly, the firm may be attempting to filter out the
tire kickers, those who aren't serious buyers, and thus making more efficient use of their
resources.
The next step is evaluation.
A critical element of the evaluation process is the fact that consumers typically reduce
the set of alternatives they seriously consider down to a small number, maybe three or four,
to make a consideration set.
This decision by consumers as to which three or four to include in that set, is in turn
impacted by a psychological process called categorization.
For example, a consumer may only consider "top" MBA programs or "small" MBA programs.
Of course, these are inherently ambiguous labels.
What does "top" mean?
What does "small" mean?
So marketers need to worry about the extent to which their products are categorized in
the way they would like.
It's important to note that categorization is not exogenous.
The firm can, and often does, take steps to impact the categorization of their products.
As an example, when Toyota and Nissan launched the new Lexus and Infiniti brands, one of
the dominant reasons for this was categorization.
They wanted their new cars to be categorized as luxury cars and not "Japanese" cars, which
might not be included in the target buyer's consideration set.
Once the consideration set is formed, the customer then evaluates the members of the
consideration set.
Here, again, the marketer needs to understand the criteria being used by their target customer.
And this may vary greatly.
It might be the case that consumers are super-rational, and first they rank attributes by importance
and then evaluate each alternative based on the criteria.
This is seldom the case, but might be true for some larger or riskier purchases, like
for an MBA program, or a new car.
In reality, we often see many heuristics in the evaluation process.
Consumers may use something like brand name, or price, or market share, for example, as
a proxy for quality.
In summary, then, while we talk about "the" consumer decision-making process, there's
no such thing.
There's a tremendous variety and richness to the process.
We need to understand what the process looks like, how each step is being conducted, and
how we might best influence the consumer as they navigate through it.