Today we are going to focus on the detailed aspects of promotional execution.
We’ll address questions around who our target audience is, what our message should look
like, what our promotional objectives are and through which medium we would like to
communicate with the customer.
First off, “who is my communication target?”
Now you might say, “wait we already talked about that..that’s part of strategy.”
And you’re right, but, this is different.
Often our communication target isn’t the same as our overall strategic target.
It’s typically a subset of that product’s target.
We chose a subset for communication purposes because it can be difficult to reach our overall
target through one channel.
Another difference is that we’re usually think about our promotional target in media
terms.
That is, we should know who they are demographically, what media they consume, and ideally where
they are in the search process.
Let’s look at an example.
Imagine that the marketing managers for Cialis decided that the strategic target for their
new product is going to be current Viagra users.
Let’s imagine that they’ve decided to build awareness for their new product through
t.v. advertising.
To do this, they have to figure out how current Viagra users map into the demographic buckets
that media is usually purchased in.
For example, they might decide that men between the ages of, say, 45 and 64 are likely to
overlap with Viagra users.
The next step, then, is to figure out the media habits of this target might be, what
websites or magazines they read, or what do they watch on television.
Since men 45-64 -- like all demographic groups -- are quite heterogeneous, we’re often
going to have multiple communication targets.
No one medium will allow us to reach our overall strategic target.
Let’s now shift our focus to the next step, what’s our objective?
What do we want to accomplish as a result of our promotional plan?
It’s useful here to refer to the underlying decision making process being implemented
by the customer.
We want to consider what stage in the buying process do I want to address consumers and
where do I want to have my influence.
Let’s walk through a few examples.
Imagine that you’re out of honey, so you head to the grocery store to buy some.
Honey is, for many people, a classic low involvement product.
With that in mind, where would a honey manufacturer, such as Miller’s Honey, want to have an
impact?
Possibly, at what’s called the “point of purchase”, the location of the choice
decision.
On the other hand however, here is an example of McCormick spices.
Even though spices may also be a low involvement product, McCormick decides here to influence
at the need recognition stage.
Even with low involvement products, it may in some cases be helpful to expand the market
by promoting to people who who haven’t yet recognized their need.
McCormick released an ad with the intention to persuade people that they should buy more
spices.
In the ad they displayed common spice containers and their age, attempting to remind the consumer
that their spices may be old and stale.
These two examples are both low involvement products but they’re investing in different
stages; Miller’s Honey focusing at the choice purchase stage and McCormick at the need recognition
stage.
Here’s a utilitarian product and an example of promotion being accomplished by shampoo
manufacturers during the information search stage.
If you type “shampoo” into the google search box you may notice that there is a
tab on the top entitled “Shopping”.
If you click on this tab various shampoo brands, products and prices appear.
There are descriptions of the products and even stars indicating customer reviews.
Here, shampoo manufacturers are promoting within the information search stage.
It may be a bit surprising but it appears that even for this product, customers are
engaging in a meaningful search.
Next we will address the hedonic purchase process, one in which the consumer hasn’t
yet recognized a need but sees an opportunity and decides whether or not to make a purchase.
This example of a hedonic purchase process is on a billboard while driving from Summit
County back to the Denver airport in Colorado.
The billboard was trying to communicate to people who may had been hurt while skiing
in the mountains and were on their way home.
The ad says, “if you need to sue somebody when you get home, give us a call.”
The consumer may not have previously considered suing, and now may “purchase” this product
without doing an extensive search for the best attorney.
In this case the law firm decided who they want to target - hurt tourists, and at what
stage in the decision making process to influence.
We’ll now our focus on what to say.
What is the content of the ad?
What message do we want to send?
While this is not always the case, we usually will choose as our main message as some element
of our positioning.
That is, we want to tell our target customer what is so special about our product or our
service.
This is very different from our positioning statement though.
In particular, we need to avoid what people often refer to as being “too on the nose.”
That is, we seldom come out and simply say, “we’re the best for these five reasons.”
Instead, we try to look for ways to capture the customer’s attention and engage her
with creative content that communicates the idea without being too direct.
These may be somewhat extreme examples of not being too direct
What do you think is going on here?
Well, these advertisers have chosen to be almost entirely opaque.
However, for their target, they’re saying, “we’re one of you” or “we speak your
language” without actually saying “we speak your language.”
To recap we have talked about the target, the objective and the message.
Whom we’re speaking to, what we want to accomplish and what we want to say.
Finally we’ll address the question of, where we want to broadcast the message, through
which medium do we want to deliver that message?
Some points to consider are how many people our medium can reach and what will it cost
to reach them.
There are also a number of other dimensions along which media can be compared.
Usually, or at least traditionally, the cost of reaching customers through media channels
is quoted in CPM or cost per thousand.
What does it cost to reach 1,000 people?
You should know that there’s a huge difference across media in terms of CPM.
To run a billboard it’s going to cost me about $5 to reach 1000 people.
To run a spot in prime time TV, a 30 second spot, is going to cost me about 5 times that.
This difference makes a lot of sense since there is more I can do through a 30 second
TV spot as compared with the billboard.
There is also a wide difference in terms of the targetability of the two.
While a billboard is able to target people based on where they live and work, I can be
more precise with my targeting through a TV spot in reaching a specific demographic or
psychographic group.
It is also helpful to take note of the difference in credibility between media sources.
In fact, we’ve seen a move over the past decade away from traditional firm-to-consumer
ads towards interpersonal sources of promotion.
Word of mouth marketing for example, or social media, trying to leverage the credibility
that comes from peer recommendations as compared with firm generated ads.
I’ll finish here by walking through some of the well-known choices of media and discussing
some of the tradeoffs, benefits and drawbacks of each.
Advertising is what we think of when we think of typical marketing . The main drawback of
traditional marketing is the expense.
There may also be difficulty when it comes to coverage and reaching all of your customers
through advertising.
This is increasingly becoming the case for younger demographic groups.
PR, public relations, and word of mouth marketing are each seen as more-credible media channels.
With PR you’re leveraging the credibility of the publication.
With word of mouth marketing, you’re leveraging the credibility of peers, acquaintances, or
friends.
However, word of mouth marketing may be more expensive than traditional TV advertising
in some cases.
There’s also the argument that it’s difficult to measure the impact of word of mouth marketing.
However I have found that this is overstressed and many marketers have placed too much trust
in the measurability of traditional marketing.
I’ve found that the biggest drawback to these methods, to PR and word of mouth marketing
or social media, is that they’re difficult to control.
If I need to reach X number of customers in a certain amount of time it’s going to be
hard to do through these media sources.
It is impossible to know what will get picked up by a newspaper or by a blogger or how many
people will pass on the message.
Because of this, these techniques are good additions to a traditional campaign but often
not the central element of it.
A great method for targeting the decision making process is search engine marketing.
With this type of marketing we can influence a buyer later in the process, after they’ve
already determined that they have a need.
There are also lots of opportunities to experiment, quickly learn, and optimize in search engine
marketing.
This medium is quite competitive, however.
These are auction markets with many firms trying to use the same medium.
It can be really expensive to reach a customer, depending on the key words deemed necessary
to do so.
It’s also a very sparse medium, It’s limited in terms of what you can communicate.
Finally, let’s look at social network-based marketing.
In other words display ads or sponsored stories on sites such as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
One of the most interesting benefits here is the tremendous opportunity to target.
Some have argued that social media sites were created for social use only.
Unlike search marketing, consumers to don’t go to social media sites to learn about products,
typically.
Because of this, there’s a question of long term usefulness and the effectiveness of this
media as a promotional opportunity.
The question is long-term, will we see this as a viable promotional medium?
We’ll see.
The goal of this video was to walk you through the various and key questions one faces when
formulating a promotional plan.
We considered the communication target, overall communication objective, where to influence
people in the decision making process, what message to communicate, and finally, through
which medium to distribute that message.
While there’s a great deal of decisions to make here, promotion is one of the most
exciting and creative parts of marketing.
Enjoy!