Many companies adopt loyalty programs to entice customers to stay with them instead of switching
to a competitor.
But do they really work? Do the financial benefits of having a loyalty program justify
the costs? Do loyalty program participants really stay?
Imagine you are the marketing manager for Company “X” and are considering creating
a loyalty program. You want to know if it would be worth the investment.
Research by P. K. Kannan and colleagues can help.
To find out if loyalty programs are worth it, Kannan and his colleagues studied three
credit card companies in Europe that use loyalty programs. He made an analytical model investigating
how customers decide to return to a company or go to a competitor. His model included
several factors; including satisfaction, post-consumption assessment, comparison to the best competing
alternative, re-patronage intentions, and so on.
Kannan and his colleagues used two different methods to evaluate the model: a logistic
regression to estimate customer’s decision on whether to use the card again, and the
Tobit regression model to factor in account usage.
Then he used maximum-likelihood test and t-test to see how accurate the results would be.
Both analyses answered the core question: Do loyalty programs increase the customer’s
satisfaction and usage of products?
Kannan and his colleagues found that loyalty programs did a great job predicting whether
customers remained loyal to the company.
In fact, loyalty programs explained 85% of the customers decisions.
So, why do loyalty programs seem to work?
Kannan and his colleagues suspect that customers in loyalty programs are less likely to compare
companies’ pricing, and notice drops in quality of service and increases in price.
What more, his research showed that the loyalty program was associated with increased profit.
Although this research focuses on credit card companies, the results are consistent with
the common idea that loyalty programs work.
Based on the results of Kannan’s research, company “X” should feel confident investing
in a loyalty program.