- Hi, my name is PK Kannan, the Dean's Chair
in Marketing Science here at Smith.
I research issues in the areas of
customer relationship management, digital marketing,
and marketing analytics.
In this segment, we're gonna be looking
at how to derive the expression for Customer Lifetime Value.
It's a good idea to start thinking about a bond.
A bond is something that you invest in
at the beginning, you pay some dollars,
and over the life of the bond, you're gonna get
a steady stream of income, and at the end of the period
of the bond, you get your redemption back.
So you start off with some investment,
you get some regular payouts,
and then there is a redemption amount.
Now if you want to know what is the return on investment
that you did in this particular bond,
you can actually take the Net Present Value
of all the payments that you get,
regular payouts and the redemption value,
and then try to understand how this particular payment
really gives you a return over
the investment that you have made.
Now, Measuring Customer Value
is pretty much the same process.
So over the lifetime of a customer,
you start acquiring the customer
providing some acquisition cost.
And over the life of the customer,
you're gonna get some payments.
So here we are assuming that the acquisition cost
for this example is $70.
Think of this person as a customer
that you have acquired for a bank.
And once this customer has become a customer for the firm,
this customer is gonna provide some steady margin.
So here margin is revenue minus cost.
And let's assume that the revenue is $100 a year
with a cost of service fee $50
so the bank makes a margin
of $50 with this particular customer.
Now, every year, when this person is a customer for the bank
let's assume that he or she provides
the same margin over time.
Now, the next thing that I want to think about is retention.
Now if you become a customer of a bank,
you may remain a customer of the bank for some time,
and if you get a better deal from another bank
or if you move from this bank to some other place
your retention rate will come into play
which means not all customers that the bank acquires
are gonna remain their customers at the end of the year.
And this is governed by the retention rate that we have.
Say the retention rate is 80%.
Which means, if you bring in 100 customers,
only 80 of them are gonna remain
with you at the end of the year.
And let's assume that this retention rate
is gonna stay constant from year to year.
So what is my expected margin after one year
if the retention rate is 80%?
So the margin we said was $50
and retention rate is 0.8,
and so I'm gonna take margin times the retention rate
and this is the expected value of the margin
after one year which is $40.
So what's gonna happen if it's after two years?
After two years, the expected value of this return is going
to be margin times retention rate for the first year
times the retention rate for the second year.
So it's gonna be "m" times "r" squared which is
m times 0.8 times 0.8 and that's gonna be $32.
And I can do this to find out my expected margin
after three years, which is gonna be
m times r to the power of three and thus
this is $32 times 0.8, which is $25.60.
And that's what I have indicated there on the top.
mr, mr squared, and then you have mr to the power four,
and so on and so forth.
Now let's look at
the interest rate, cost of capital.
Say the cost of capital is 10%.
Now the income that you are getting one year from now
at today's value can be captured using this expression.
So m times r divided by 1+i, so this $40 that I got
after one year divided by this 1.1. So the Net Present Value
of this margin flow one year from now is gonna be $36.36.
And I can do the same thing for Net Present Value
of the margin flow after year two, which is gonna be
this mr squared
divided by 1+i squared
and this turns out to be $26.45.
And that's basically what I have there
so this expression is mr divided by 1+i,
mr squared divided by 1+i squared, and so on so forth.
And if I were to take the overall
flow of margins over time, this is gonna look like this
and then I just write it as an expression here
t going from 0 to infinity, is an infinite series
m times r to the power of t divided by 1+i to the power t.
Now it so happens that this is a geometric series
that can be easily be combined
and then you can get a close form solution for that
and this expression then translates to
m times 1+i divided by 1+i-r.
So, this expression that you have here
is called Margin Multiple and this is the margin.
So the margin is multiplied by this
margin multiple 1+i over 1+i-r and
that's basically what the lifetime value of a customer is.
So if i is the cost of capital, if r is the retention rate,
m is the margin, and A is acquisition cost,
the customer lifetime value is the sum of
all Net Present Value margins minus the acquisition cost A,
so that's basically what we have here
m times 1+i over 1+i-r - A
So this margin multiple that we have here
has some interesting implications.
So you look at this particular graph, table
that we have here, it provides a margin multiple
for different values of discount rates,
interest rates, and retention rates.
So if the retention rate is 60%
and your interest rate is 12%,
the margin multiple is 2.15.
But if the retention rate goes up to 90%
then the margin multiple goes up to 5.09.
So the multiple goes from two to five.
So this shows the retention rate has a great impact
on the customer lifetime value
and that really shows that customer lifetime value
really can be impacted by the retention rates that we see.