In this screencast we’ll talk about customer management.
Okay so you may be asking, “what is customer management?”
Well, customer management is a way of thinking about the relationship between the firm’s
investment choices on one hand, our service levels for example, our loyalty programs,
and long term outcomes like lifetime customer profits on the other.
The key difference as compared with what we’ve talked about at this point is that here we’re
focusing on a dynamic, long-term horizon.
Okay, let’s begin with thinking about, what the possible relationship might be among these
various components.
Okay this is the typical model.
This shows how we might view the relationship.
As a firm, let’s say we increase our service, and you know, this should lead to higher levels
of satisfaction, which should lead to higher levels of loyalty by customers, and then ultimately,
loyal customers should lead to higher profits over time.
Okay, this seems reasonable, right?
But does it really make sense?
Is it always true?
First, let’s look at this downstream relationship which claims that higher levels of loyalty
will lead to higher levels of profit.
Again, is this always the case?
Well, there are a couple of issues that we want to keep in mind here.
Number one is the definition of loyalty.
What do we mean when we say an ‘increase in loyalty?’
Well there are at least two different ways to think about loyalty.
One is called behavioural loyalty and the other is called attitudinal loyalty.
Behavioural loyalty is exactly what it says, we infer or measure customer loyalty by looking
at behaviour.
For example we might look at customers that spend more time at our restaurant, or customers
that choose our credit card more commonly than our competitor’s credit card or, whenever
a customer chooses to do a search online, they choose our search engine, and not somebody
else’s search engine.
This is just, again, observed behaviour.
Attitudinal loyalty on the other hand is harder to measure.
While behavioural loyalty is just measured by again observing the customer, Attitudinal
loyalty is typically assessed with a survey, and we ask a series of questions of the customer
to assess their true connection to the firm.
So it turns out that while behavioural loyalty is the best way to assess loyalty as, again
you might imagine since it's easier to measure, it doesn’t predict very well differences
in customer profitability.
Attitudinal loyalty on the other hand is a somewhat stronger predictor.
So while we probably believe that loyalty and profit might be related in this way, we
have to be very careful what we mean by loyalty, how we define it, and again, how we measure
it.
The second issue here is really the underlying theory that gives rise to this prediction
that an increase in loyalty should lead to an increase in profit.
So that theory usually sounds something like this, “Customers are more loyal, therefore
they may have higher switching costs, number one, or maybe we don’t have to spend as
much money trying to market to them or serve them, and as a result they become more profitable,
number two.”
So it turns out that these argument are not necessarily always true.
Research has shown, for example, that it's not necessarily the case that due to higher
switching costs, customers will necessarily pay a higher price.
Similarly again it's not necessarily the case that it costs less to serve loyal customers.
Often, for example, they understand that they have power.
They understand that they play an important role in the firm’s profitability, and maybe
they want to exploit that power.
They also may simply disapprove of the firms attempts to exploit the higher switching costs.
So again, while this may be a framework that works again intuitively most of the time,
we want to be careful to not assume that these relationships always hold.
Moving upstream a little bit, does satisfaction lead to higher customer loyalty?
Well we hope this is true.
And in fact a lot of empirical research has supported this idea that if we can improve
customer satisfaction then in fact it will lead to higher levels of loyalty.
One thing I want to caution you about here is just something I commonly hear, and that
is this reasoning in reverse.
In other words, what this shows, and again what we often see, is that if we increase
satisfaction, we’ll have more loyal customers.
Great.
What is not the case necessarily, is that firms with the largest customer bases which
we might think about as being the more loyal customer bases, necessarily have the highest
satisfaction.
That is, you should not draw from this, the conclusion that the firms with the highest
market share necessarily deliver the highest customer satisfaction.
That is absolutely not the case, in general.
In fact it is very often the opposite.
Higher market shares for example is associated more commonly with lower customer satisfaction.
And this isn’t very surprising if one thinks about it a little bit.
The idea is that a bigger market share is commonly driven by a more mass-market, often
value-driven approach, and that may not necessarily lead to long term customer satisfaction, but
it may be a very good deal.
Finally, just moving up to the top of this process here, what about the relationship
between service level and satisfaction?
Is it the case that if we improve service levels, customers will be more satisfied?
Intuitively sure, it makes sense, however, I just want to note that there is an important
caveat here.
That is, we have to be careful about what we mean by ‘improving service.’
So if I were a dry cleaner for example, better service may mean faster for some segments
of customers, but it might mean a higher degree of customer interaction and possibly customization
for some other customers.
In fact, an increase in speed and efficiency, might actually represent a decrease in service
and thus satisfaction for the latter segment.
So again, as always, when assessing any aspect of our marketing implementation, including
customer management, we need to identify who’s our target, what’s our positioning.
For our target customer, and consistent with our promised benefits, what does service mean?
And how can we improve it?
So to summarize, What we’ve done here is we’ve laid out a model.
A model for thinking about the process of building long-term value for our customers,
and ultimately for the firm.
That model begins with the delivery of a service, either as the core offering or perhaps ancillary
to the physical product.
If we plan and implement this properly, of course with a deep understanding of customer
tastes and preferences, this should lead to satisfaction, which over the long run should
lead to attitudinal loyalty, and ideally the firm will benefit from this loyalty in the
form of greater long-run profits.
But again we need to be aware of the limitations on our ability to do so.