In an earlier part of this module we talked about the role that costs should pay in setting
your price.
When prices are based on our cost, we call that cost plus pricing.
Typically we take our cost to produce a product, and multiply that by some number greater than
one to ensure we always make a certain level of profit.
I want to go a bit deeper on this topic because it’s such a popular way, and yet not a very
sensible way to set prices.
Firms create value for customers through products, services and experiences, through the channels
we use, through our promotional activities, and the brands we create.
When we set our price, we decide how much of that value created, we’re going to capture.
Pricing is important because it plays a critical role in determining the profit a firm makes.
Profits are calculated by taking the unit price, minus the cost of good sold, and multiplying
that by the number of units that we sell.
Robert Dolan, author of the book Power Pricing says firms often don’t pay enough attention
to price, focusing more on their cost of good if good sold or COGS because firms feel as
if they can control that, and firms pay more attention to volume because we feel like we
can measure it.
But setting the price can be difficult, and so to feel safe, firms resort to a cost plus
pricing approach.
When I say cost plus pricing, what I mean is that you’re setting your price equal
to the cost of good sold, plus some factor.
That factor’s typically based on the margin or the percentage of profit you want to make.
So the first reason that cost plus pricing doesnt work is that it requires you to predict
the volume you’ll be able to sell in order for you to calculate the price.
If you look at the equations you need to solve to set a cost plus price, you’ll see there
are too many unknown variables to solve the system of equations.
For example, if you want to achieve a 40% margin, you would divide your cost of good
sold by 60%, and that would calculate your price.
Now if you look at this equation, how do I figure out the cost of good sold?
I know my desired margin, but how do I figure out my cost?
Well my cost is defined as my fixed cost, divided by the volume I’m going to sell,
plus the variable cost.
And what’s our volume?
The volume we’re likely to sell is a function of the value we create of the customer and
the price, wouldn’t you agree?
For example, if you put a Lexus on the market for $70,000 your going to sell a certain number
of them.
And if you put it on the market for $35,000, you’ll probably sell quite a different number.
Volume is indeed a function of price.
But what’s our price?
Well, price is a function of our cost of good sold.
What’s our cost of good sold?
It’s dependent on our volume.
So we’re going in a circle here.
We can’t really solve the system of equations so we end up making an assumption to sort
of put a stake in the ground.
If I want to sell a widget, say a remote mouse to click through my powerpoint slides, and
I think a reasonable price is $3.33, I might turn to my experience in the market to estimate
that I’ll sell 100,000 units.
So this is how we get around the first challenge with cost plus pricing, we make an assumption.
Let’s use this example of a remote mouse, to look at reason number two, that cost plus
pricing doesn't work.
So we’ve assumed that at a price of $3 and 33 cents we’ll sell 100,000 of these remote
mice.
And lets further assume that our fixed cost to run our factory is 100 dollars and our
variable cost to produce each one of these is a dollar.
OK, year one.
We believe we are going to sell 100,000 units.
So we divide our fixed cost by our predicted volume, we add our variable cost, and sum
that up to a total cost of good sold to two dollars.
We divide that by 60% or one mius our desired margin of forty percent, and we get a price
of $3 and 33 cents.
Now, suppose we were far too pessimistic, and instead of selling 100,000 units we sell
far more, maybe 200,000 units.
The next year when it’s time to sell our price we go, OK, let’s take our fixed cost,
divide that by our units, which is 200,000, and add that to our variable cost to get our
total cost to good sold.
That comes up to $1.50.
So the cost of good sold has gone down because our volume went up.
Our cost plus pricing role says our price is based on our cost so we take this new COGS,
divide it by 60%, and now our new price is $2.
50 cents, down from last year’s price of $3.33.
Is that what you would do if you’d sold twice as many as you anticipated?
No, of course not.
And people would say, no they would never do that, but if you set up a system where
you price your products using cost plus pricing that is exactly what you’re going to do.
Guess what happens when you put this product down on the market at $2.50?
You sell even more.
So the next year you sell 300,000, and using cost plus pricing, you’ll lower the price
even further the following year.
Students argue with me that they would never do this, but plenty of firms do.
You’re either cost plus pricing or you’re not.
That’s what happens if you underestimate demand.
Reason number 3.
The third reason is really just the flip side of reason number two.
All of the information here is the same, except this time we don’t sell 100,000 units in
year one.
This time we’ve overestimated demand for our product, and instead we only sell 75,000
units.
So in year two we take our fixed cost, divide that by last year’s volume, add the one
dollar for variable cost, which brings our total cost to $2.33, up from $2.
We divide that by 60% and our price goes up.
Our new price is $3.89.
So what do you think happens to sales next year?
Next year we sell fewer, and the price goes up again and it’s going to keep going up
and up.
Is this rational?
Would you raise prices when you’re not selling as many as you’d anticipated?
Let’s take a look at the fourth reason cost plus pricing doesn’t work.
This time, let’s suppose we’ve estimated volume exactly right, at $3.33 we sell exactly
100,000 of these mice.
In this scenario, suppose your firm decides to invest to reduce your fixed cost from $100,000
down to $75,000.
You’re still selling the same number of units.
In year two you divide your fixed cost, $75,000, by 100,000 units.
And you add the one dollar variable cost to get your cost of good sold to $1.75.
Then following the formula, you divide this by 60%, to get a price of $2.92.
So because your cost went down, the price goes down.
Now you might want to lower your price, maybe that’s why you made the investment in your
operations.
But why else might you invest in your operations?
To get your margins higher.
But if you’re using a cost plus pricing approach, you’re automatically going to
give the savings from your efficiencies to the customer.
With cost plus pricing, everytime you make an improvement to your fixed cost, you’re
lowering your prices.
To summarize, four reasons why cost plus pricing doesn't work.
Reason one, to set a cost plus price, you have to predict volume.
But volume and price are intertwined.
There are too many unknowns to solve the system of equations.
Forcing you to make assumptions about volume and price.
Reason two, if demand goes up, a cost plus price will drive the price continually down,
which is the exact opposite what you would do if demand was greater than you expected.
Reason three, if demand goes down, the price will continually go up.
Also counter intuitive.
Reason 4, if you invest to reduce your fixed cost, or your variable cost, a cost plus pricing
strategy will by definition pass all the savings to the customer rather than increase your
margin.
What’s a better way to price?
We’ll talk about that in the next video.