In this video, we will look at a couple of very common generic strategies for pricing,
especially in a new product context.
The two most common approaches for pricing in such a situation are called “skimming”
and “penetration pricing.”
They are in many ways mirror images of each other.
First, let’s look at skimming.
In skimming, we initially set a high price with hopes of “skimming off” or selling
to those customers that have the highest willingness to pay.
Then, over time we’ll walk down this demand curve, decreasing prices little by little
as we sweep out the surplus under the demand curve.
When the first plasma tvs came out in the late 90’s, they went for up to $15,000.
Today, you can buy them -- with far better picture quality for well under $1,000.
Penetration pricing is the opposite.
The firm sets a low price right from the outset, and sells to the mass market at an affordable
price.
This is a more-common strategy that we typically see every day.
So, how should you choose?
When is one better than the other?
Well, on one hand, a skimming strategy requires the firm to have a strong competitive position.
Why is that?
Skimming relies on the idea that prices will decrease over time.
But for this to work in practice, the firm needs to have lead time over its competition.
That is, the firm needs time to walk down that demand curve and successively lower prices
without any expectation of a price war.
It's also typical that we see a skimming strategy in less elastic markets, relatively speaking.
In these markets, because demand is less sensitive to price, there’s less incentive for the
firm to cut price quickly.
[pause] On the other hand, when consumers are highly price-elastic you're more likely
to see a penetration pricing strategy.
Penetration pricing results in a quick buildup of share.
This may be beneficial if there are possible scale economies.
That is, how quickly does my cost of production decline as the volume of sales increases.
In the case of manufactured goods, this is often substantial.
As a result, you can see that there would be a significant advantage to building that
scale early, and this in turn would be facilitated by penetration pricing.
The firm might also consider penetration to be preferable if they’re worried about competitors
entering the market quickly.
In this case, they really want to build up that installed base right away.
So, as always, the answer is not a one-size-fits all.
What’s we need to do is appreciate the important differences between penetration and skimming
and to carefully consider when each is most appropriate.