Today we’ll begin our discussion of pricing policy with a focus on the absolutely fundamental
questions surrounding the basis for the price itself.
While we all interact with prices and think about prices every day -- is this the best
price for milk?
Is it worth going to unlimited data at that price?
-- many students I come into contact with are somewhat confused by price setting.
It’s just not always clear where or how to begin.
So, we’re going to start right at the beginning by understanding what considerations go into
our choice of price and what our first steps should be in choosing the right price for
our product or service.
I want you to have a product in mind.
It can be anything.
In fact, it doesn’t even need to be a product.
It could also be a service.
And now, your job is to figure out what the price should be.
Where do you start?
I realize this is a complicated question because there are so many possible answers.
However, the answer is a simple one and it nearly always holds: we start by looking at
value.
In other words, we figure out the consumer’s willingness to pay for the product.
Next, we have to worry about the role of costs.
While the willingness to pay is the upper end of possible prices I can charge, the variable
cost reflects the low end of that range.
We can't price above value and we shouldn't price below variable cost.
Then, we factor in competition.
The more pronounced the competition is, the closer I will be to the lower end of the price
range I’ve defined.
Finally, and closely related to value, I need to think about the shape of the demand curve.
Economists talk about a concept called price elasticity which captures the sensitivity
of demand to price changes.
Highly-elastic demand means that for a small change in price I see a big change in quantity.
On the other hand, inelastic demand means that even for some fairly large range of price
changes, quantity will not change substantially.
Generally speaking, prices will be higher under inelastic than elastic demand.
There’s one last point I want to make about costs and their impact on pricing.
Typically we consider only variable costs in this process.
Theory would tell us that fixed costs should have nothing to do with our prices because
they are, in some sense, a sunk cost.
From a normative perspective I would tell you not to think about your fixed costs when
formulating prices, but at the same time, your competitors may do so.
Just to summarize, the first thing you should think about in pricing is value.
What is the market willing to pay and how will that differ across customers?
Then, what do my variable costs mean in terms of the lowest price I can consider charging?
How aggressive is my competition?
Can I price at the high end of the possible range?
And finally, how price elastic is this market.