- Let's solve the cable coat problem together.
How do we start to tackle this problem?
To understand the value we create
with our polymer strong coat,
we need to understand if cable manufacturers
will be able to sell cables made with it
for more money than the generic covering.
So what is the total economic value to building managers
of 100 feet of cable covered with strong coat?
First we need to determine the price
of the next-best alternative cable.
The case states that the cable covered in generic coating
costs $6.50 per 100 feet.
So that goes in the bottom box as our reference price.
How are strong coat cables positively differentiated?
Well, if you don't have to replace cables as often,
you save five percent on the cost
of the cable that you're purchasing.
Or $6.50 times five percent which comes to 31 cents.
The case also states that replacing cable
costs about $60 in labor.
So building managers would also
do that five percent less frequently,
or save $3 per hundred feet of cable.
Because the cable fails less frequently,
the building manager also anticipates fewer outage refunds.
Outage refunds cost $40,
if they happen during critical business hours.
However those critical hours are only about 20%
of the time the building is in use
and if our cables covered in strong coat
fail five percent less frequently,
we can calculate the savings
as $40 times the 20% for the critical business hours,
times the five percent less frequently,
which comes to 40 cents.
So the total economic value
of a cable covered in strong coat works out to $10.23
However, as you may have noted,
we're not in the cable-selling business.
We sell the polymer that the cable coating is made from.
So we have to figure out
if a communications cable manufacturer
can sell a cable coated in our polymer
for $10.23, rather than $6.50,
then what should they be willing to pay us per pound
for our strong coat polymer?
Well, what do we know
about the cable coating polymer market?
We know that the generic coating sells
for 28 cents per pound to cable manufacturers.
Now we want to be sure we get the units right,
so what units have we been using so far?
We've been working with 100 feet of cable.
So how many pounds do we need to coat 100 feet of cable?
The case tells us we need 16.25 pounds.
So let's multiply 28 cents per pound times 16.25
to get our prices in units of 100 feet of cable.
That means that's the price of the next-best alternative.
Our reference price for generic-coated cables is $4.55
So to reiterate for $4.55,
a cable maker can coat 100 feet of cable in generic polymer
that sells for $6.50.
Now, positive differentiation.
How much more is a cable coated in strong coat worth
to the cable manufacturer?
Earlier we showed that it was worth $10.23,
because of the value it creates for the building manager.
That's an additional $3.73
over what they sell the generic cable for.
So that's the value added we really create
for cable manufacturers.
But is that all?
No, there are some negatives.
If the cables covered with strong coat fail less frequently,
the cable manufacturers get to sell less cable,
five percent less.
And really the actual loss isn't on profit,
not the full selling price.
What's the cable maker's profit on 100 feet of cable?
It's currently $6.50, what they sell it for,
minus $4.55.
Or $1.95 profit per 100 feet of cable.
If they sell five percent less cable,
that's about 10 cents less in profit.
The case states explicitly that your boss has done
quite a few customer interviews
and knows that cable makers don't like to be beholden
to a sole source.
So we have to compensate them for that risk.
That reduces our value created by about 33 cents.
The case also states that cable makers
will have higher selling costs,
because they have to convince building managers
that it's worth having these more reliable,
more expensive cables.
And that that higher selling cost is around $1.30
for 100 feet of cable.
So the total economic value of strong coat
to the cable manufacturer, our customers,
is equal to $4.55 plus our positive differentiation,
which is $3.75.
Then we subtract out our negative differentiators.
10 cents, 33 cents, and $1.30.
When you add up these numbers,
you come to a total economic value
of $6.55 per 100 feet of cable.
Or to get that into pounds,
we divide it by 16.25,
arriving at 40 cents per pound of strong coat polymer.
Now while it might be hard for us
to visualize a two stage situation like this,
you can imagine that if you were in the business,
it would be more intuitive to you.
And the arithmetic itself is easy.
The challenge here, which is less obvious
when the information is given to you,
is understanding at a deep level,
how your product creates value,
not just for your customer,
but for your customer's customer.