Now we’re going to talk a bit more about how to think about and understand the value
we create for our customer.
And we’ll talk about how value, and specifically economic value, is a better starting point
than our cost for setting our price, especially in a B2B or business to business context.
We’ve already identified four reasons that cost plus pricing doesn't work.
Now let’s take a look at a different approach.
Value pricing means that we price our product based on the value it creates for our customers,
specifically we work to understand the value that a product, service or experience creates
for its targeted customer segment.
This value is called the total economic value, or the objective value, and it provides a
ceiling for the price we’ll set.
On the opposite end of the pricing arrow here, COGS is our most typical price floor.
In rare circumstances we might price below our cost, for a limited time for strategic
reasons.
But this clearly isn’t a viable strategy in the long term, and in some regions and
situations it can be illegal.
So let’s use COGS as our price floor.
Somewhere below the total economic, or objective value, is the perceived value, the value of
our offering as perceived by the target customer.
We hope this is above what it costs us to make the product.
If not, then this isn't an attractive market to be in, or we’ve got some heavy lifting
to do to educate our customer about our value.
Both the total economic value and the perceived value are influenced by our competitors prices,
or what we’ll call here, the reference price.
This is the price of the next best alternative, what our customers would buy if they didn’t
buy our product.
Perceived value is also influenced by our marketing efforts.
Our marketing can drive perceived value up by educating our potential customers on how
our product can create value for them.
The price we set is typically below the perceived value.
Why is that?
Because we need to give the customer the opportunity to capture some of the values that they perceive,
to pay less than the value they think they’re getting.
If not, then they have no incentive to make a purchase.
And the difference between the price we set and our cost of good sold is our incentive
to be in this business.
That’s our profit.
Now you should, and you can know your cost of good sold, but how do you determine the
objective value?
Thomas Nagle and his coauthors have outlined a process in their book, The Strategy and
Tactics of Pricing, and we’ll provide a quick overview of that here.
So let’s go through an in-depth explanation of this one point on the pricing arrow.
The objective or total economic value.
Again, this process is most relevant in B2B markets.
To calculate this value, we need to know three things.
Number one, the reference price.
What’s the price of what the customer would buy if he didn’t purchase our product?
Number two, how is our product better than the alternative, our positive differentiation?
And number three, how is our product worse than the reference product, our negative differentiation?
While it’s only three numbers, it will take a great deal of work to get the data and market
insight to calculate this total economic value or TEV.