Managing a channel is a critical -- though not always highly-appreciated -- aspect of
marketing.
It begins with the fundamental understanding that we and our channel partners simply have
different objectives.
What this means is that, for us to succeed, we need to, number one, design the channel
in a way that reflects our goals as well as those of the channel.
And, at the same time, we also need to manage the channel -- designing incentives, handling
conflicts -- to ensure that our partners are acting in a way commensurate with the efficient
and effective operation of the entire system.
To frame the issue here, let’s take a look at a few different channel structures of varying
degrees of complexity.
On the complex side, consider a channel for the sale of Chateau Margaux wine.
After they’ve grown the grapes and made the wine, they sell it to a broker, who sells
it to an importer, who sells it to a retailer like a restaurant or a wine shop.
Finally, they sell it to wine drinker.
On the simpler side, sometimes manufacturers sell directly to customers.
For example, Fidelity creates and manages its own mutual funds and sells them directly
to investors.
In the middle we see two and three step distribution channels, like Aqualisa that manufactures
shower heads.
They sell those shower heads to showrooms who in turn sell them to consumers.
Channels come in all shapes, sizes, and degrees of complexity.
We'll look at what channels need to do, challenges associated with channel design and management,
and channel conflict and its management.
So, let’s imagine we have a product we want to sell.
Let’s say we sell lacrosse sticks for example.
And we need to figure out a way to get these sticks -- which we manufacture right here
in Maryland of course-- into the hands of our customers all around the US and, little
by little, perhaps the world.
So, what do we need to do to accomplish this?
Well, at a high level we need four different sets of tasks to be performed.
We first need somebody to generate demand, to make customers aware of our great products.
This ensures that our sticks are represented in the consideration sets of our target customers.
Conditional on that, somebody has to fulfill demand.
Once people decide they want to buy from us, they have to be made available.
Third, somebody has to follow up and make sure people are happy and any problems that
arise post purchase are dealt with.
Then finally, we need somebody to gather and analyze market feedback over time so we can
learn about the market and figure out what to do next.
Now, once we’ve figured out what needs to get done -- and note that this is going to
look very different for different products….for lacrosse sticks, customers need to be able
to try them out, see how they feel.
For airline tickets, they need the times, availability and prices -- we next need to
know who's going to do these things?
On one hand, we could do all of them.
If we do this, we also need to decide through which channel they’ll be accomplished.
For example, do we facilitate showrooming, providing people with opportunities to play
with our sticks and then ordering the one they like online?
Or, do we facilitate webrooming where customers can shop our website online and configure
their ideal stick and then pick it up offline in one of our stores?
Of course, there are nearly-unlimited combinations of options.
Usually, though, we enlist the help of others.
That is, we allocate some set of responsibilities to various members of the channel.
For example, we might sell through retailers who both generate and fulfill demand.
We can use this framework, called the hybrid grid, developed by Moriarty and Moran, to
help identify and think through the options available to us.
The framework makes two important points.
One point is that, in designing a channel we want to begin by thinking about the tasks.
We want to first write out and think about what needs to be accomplished and then to
assign those tasks to various players or constituencies.
It also makes the point that there needs to be at least one check mark in every row.
In other words every one of these tasks needs to be accomplished by someone.
This can be an issue when we have discussions of disintermediation, or removing a player
from our distribution channel.
What has to be recognized is that the task accomplished by that player can't be eliminated,
somebody's got to fulfill demand for example.
We can rearrange these tasks but we can’t eliminate them.
Disintermediation can be great in making the channel more efficient, but tasks cannot be
eliminated completely.
OK, so tasks are the building blocks of channel design.
Once we’ve designed our channel then the next challenge is how do we manage it?
How do we make sure that those people or organizations or firms with tasks that we’ve assigned
to them, actually perform them in the way we hope?
Now, you might ask, “why is this a problem?”
Why can’t we just count on the salespeople at Modell’s to sell the lacrosse sticks
the way we want them to?
Well, because their business is not to sell our lacrosse sticks.
Their business is to sell sporting good of all types and brands to all different types
of customers.
They’re solving a very difference problem than we’re solving.
They may have very different priorities and, as a result, we have what we call “misaligned
incentives.”
We want different things.
The challenge from a channel management perspective, is how do we coordinate the channel?
How do we create a context in which our channel partners will make choices in line with what
we would like them to make.
So what I want to do is walk through the most-common sources of conflict born out of this mis-aligned
incentive -- we often call this “channel conflict” -- and some possible solutions
for addressing them.
At a basic level, it is common for firms to deal with what’s called “vertical conflict”
between the channel and the manufacturer.
So for example between HP and Best Buy.
HP might want Best Buy to train their sales people more than they’ve been training them
so far, and Best Buy might want HP to advertise more to create more demand.
Again, given their different roles and objectives, they rarely agree on the “right”levels
of training or advertising.
So, what can HP do to make sure that Best Buy salespeople have the product knowledge
they feel they need?
Well, at a basic level, they might just use power.
“Either you train your salespeople to the level we expect you to, or we won’t sell
through your channel.”
Of course, not all brands have this kind of power.
You might, instead, try to write a contract with real penalties or incentives to encourage
the right behavior.
This may sometimes work but is difficult to implement in complex environments in which
actions are so highly variable.
When all else fails, of course, we might just do it ourselves...we might either hire our
own salespeople to work on the floor at BB or perhaps hire a training company to go in
and train the BB salespeople for us.
Now, there is also horizontal conflict.
This is conflict that occurs in a channel, among channel partners of the same level.
So again, imagine we're HP selling the same printers through now not only Best Buy but
also Staples, and Target.
We might find that there’s price competition among those channel partners, and so Best
Buy complains to HP that HP wants training and support for their products, but Best Buy
can’t make money because Target is slashing prices, and they need to compete with them.
This price competition among channel members hurts the manufacturer because it means that
the channel partners won't invest in other things like marketing sales training.
I might have the power to deal with it, and say to Target, look either you cut it out
or you don't sell my product.
There's also a concept called branded variants, a sort of cosmetic differentiation of products
that softens comparison by consumers.
So for example in consumer electronics you might have the same product functionally,
but one might have the volume knob on the right on one model and on the left on another.
While this doesn't really impact the quality or the function of the product, what it does
is it makes it harder for consumers to compare across the products and thereby softens price
competition.
Another approach to deal with this horizontal conflict is something called resale price
maintenance.
This works when a manufacturer creates a pool of marketing funds, and tells, say, Target
that it will give them $50,000 for advertising, but they can’t advertise below a certain
price.
So it doesn't say that you can't charge whatever price you want to charge (this would be illegal)
but it just says that the manufacturer won't pay for the advertising if the price advertised
is below a certain level.
Of course, this creates an incentive to charge the price at a desired level.
Finally, the manufacturer also faces competitive conflict with distributors.
So, Imagine that a lot of University of Maryland professors go to Best Buy to get printers.
But yet at the same time, HP is selling directly to UMD.
This means that HP is now in competition with it’s own channel, with Best Buy.
And so Best Buy says, "Hey, you want me invest in training and do marketing, and all this
stuff, but now you're competing with me?
How can you justify that?”
The firm deals with this in a number of different ways.
So number one, typically we're not going to price compete with our channel partner.
Typically HP is never going to undercut Best Buy.
As a result, we're more of a price follower than a prie leader in this situation.
Also, commonly you’ll see manufacturers carving out either a segment, or a type of
customer, such as those with academic or government accounts, and leaving the rest of the customer
base to the retailers.
What that does is it mitigates any direct competition.
They make it clear that “these customers are yours and these are ours.”
Finally, sometimes, the manufacture will pay double commissions -- that is,pay their direct
salespeople for making any sales to UMD and at the same time compensating Best Buy for
the sales they might have missed.
So, in summary, our channels policy has two parts -- channel design and channel management.
In channel design, I need to begin with a detailed understanding of the tasks I need
accomplished and then allocate them to those I feel are best positioned to accomplish them.
Channel management, on the other hand, is about making sure these jobs get done the
way we want.
We discussed the fact that our incentives are always mis-aligned and this leads to conflict.
And then we went over some different approaches for dealing with the conflict.
Channels are really complicated.
So I hope this video has helped you to get a feel for some of the important decisions
and significant challenges that one faces in the channels domain.

