In this video, we'll discuss the most salient of all of marketing tactics, promotion.
Ultimately, of course, we’ll need to figure out what our message will be, what the creative
will look like and through which medium we’ll communicate to our customer.
First though, we need to consider a somewhat higher-order problem: where in the distribution
system will our promotional efforts, and dollars, be spent?
That is, we need to decide whether we want to invest in push or pull.
Let’s look at a simple example of a shampoo manufacturer.
Consider Mane ‘n Tail, a shampoo product made by a company called Straight Arrow.
While most personal care products like this are sold through a variety of channel structures,
let’s simplify things a bit and assume that Straight Arrow sells this product to retailers
like CVS and Walgreen’s who, in turn, sell it to consumers.
To facilitate these sales, they want to invest in promotion and, again, they need to decide
whether it should be primarily push or pull.
So, what is push promotion?
Push promotion occurs when a company invests the bulk of their promotional dollars influencing
the channel.
In this case, Straight Arrow’s salespeople would go to, say, CVS, and convince them they
should carry Mane n Tail.
You might visualize this as the firm pushing the product down through the distribution
channel.
On the other hand, pull promotion is when the firm invests in the last level in the
distribution channel; the customer.
With pull, we invest in creating demand among customers by convincing them why Mane n Tail
is better than Suave or Pert or Head n Shoulders.
The idea is that we invest in consumers who will then pull the product down through the
channel.
They'll demand Mane n Tail from Walgreens who will request that we sell it to them so
they can satisfy the customer demand.
So that’s the basic idea behind push and pull.
Let’s delve a bit more into how they work and what the challenges are in each.
If a company is doing push promotion, the main challenge is to create a set of incentives
for the distribution channel that will encourage them to work on behalf of the manufacturer
to sell their product down through the channel, ultimately to the customer.
In order for us to be successful in this, we need to understand our distributors’
incentives and preferences.
In this sense, in a push system, the channel is effectively our customer and we need to
treat them in a way consistent with this.
That is, we need to segment the market, position the product in their eyes, reflecting their
tastes and perceptions.
So, how does this work?
What does it look like?
Often push promotion is done via direct sales.
We might also go in and train the distributor’s sales force on our products.
For example, Samsung invests in training the folks on the floor at Best Buy.
Another common form of push promotion is trade deals.
We might offer, for example, 10% off of wholesale prices for some retailers who might pass on
some or all of this added margin to the consumer or use it to fund internal training or other
marketing.
That’s push.
How does pull work?
Under pull, what I'm most worried about is the power of the consumer compared with the
channel.
Let me give you an example.
If Microsoft invests millions in advertising the xbox - pull promotion -- they might be
concerned about the customer that walks into Best Buy and is told by a salesperson on the
floor that they should ignore those ads and buy a Nintendo Switch instead.
In fact, that salesperson might even be reacting to push promotion -- training, incentives,
etc. -- being implemented by Nintendo.
So, our pull promotion -- whether it’s advertising, consumer deals, demos, etc. -- has to be effective
enough to overcome the influence of the salesperson.
Otherwise, the money was wasted.
I hope this video was helpful.
As you move forward in your study of promotion, please keep in mind which approach -- push
or pull -- makes most sense in a given context.
This will help a great deal in implementing an effective promotional strategy.